- Hello, everyone. Charlie, Will, Eric, Sebastian, Gina, and Samuel. What a big group of people
we have here today. An awesome, awesome group. Thanks for being here, everyone.
- Yeah, thanks for having us.
- Yeah. It's going to be super fun to have you on the show. You know, people, I know
there's so many people out there that are dreaming of an open source project or even
working on open source and contributing to it, but it's something they squeeze in the
last hour of their day. And at some point, all of you have made this amazing transition
to where there's enough support, there's enough interest in what you all built, that becomes
your full-time thing, right? Which is, I know for many out there, living the dream. So you
all are living the dream. Hopefully you feel that way. But it's going to be really great
to kind of just explore your projects. How do you make that transition and what you're
up to? So we have Samuel Colvin on from Pydantic, and he has the tightest schedule. He's squeezing
us in on a far-flung trip, work trip. So let's go to you first, Samuel. Just tell people
a bit about who you are and what your project is to get started.
>> Yeah, I'm Samuel. I maintain Pydantic, which is a data validation library for Python
that uses type hints. So those weird things you've seen after the colon in Python that
mostly do nothing unless you run mypy or PyWrite, Pydantic basically enforces them. Almost exactly
a year ago, I was sort of working on Pydantic full-time by then, but really spending my
own money to do so. And a big American VC got in touch. And fast forward, I raised some
money and started a company, yeah, beginning of this year. I'm hired now. I have 10 people.
And actually, as you mentioned, I'm in Istanbul at the moment with the whole team. It turns
out I have a team with Americans, Iranians, and Russians. Istanbul is one of the few places
that you can actually meet efficiently. So yeah, we're having a really fun week in Istanbul,
mostly working together and then going out to dinner, which is where we are at the moment.
I hope that's a good, quick summary.
>> Yeah, absolutely. And what a cool experience that you get to hang out with all these people
talking about your project in Istanbul. I just had--
>> What did you say?
>> I was just thinking, the other thing I would add is that one of the best bits of
it has been being able to hire friends of mine from open source, people who had, I think,
all but two of the people here have contributed to Finantic before we started the company,
which is how I hired the first, I think, six people, and then a few more. So one of the
best bits has been hiring other people to come and work on open source with me while
still being able to pay them properly. It's been really fun.
>> Yeah, awesome. I see a lot of people shaking their head out there as well. Just coincidentally,
I recently had Sydney Rinkle on who works with you, and she's such an inspiration. That
show is not out yet, but has already been done yet through the weird time shifting of
podcasting. So it'll be out before this, but it's not out yet. So anyway, very, very cool
team you got there. All right, I guess we'll go around the order of the video. Brady Bunch
pictures here. So Charlie, you're up next.
>> Yeah, sure. Hey, so I'm Charlie. I am the author of Ruff, which is a Python linter
code formatter and code transformation tool written in Rust. I started working on Ruff
about a year ago, like maybe like October of last year.
>> Similar to Samuel, yeah.
>> Yeah, and I, you know, I worked on it full time for a while, similar to Samuel, although
probably not for quite as long. I was working on it full time without any funding. And then
similarly, I started a company around Ruff and really around the vision of trying to
build high performance Python tools. So take some of the things that make Ruff nice to
use and popular and well-liked and try to apply those principles to other parts of the
Python tool chain. So, yeah, we're a team of six, and we're fully remote. So no two
of us live in the same -- I guess a couple of us live in the same country, but most of
us live in different countries. And we span basically U.S. central time to -- I don't
know what the -- we have one person in India and one person in Minneapolis, and that kind
of stretches like the full time zones of the team.
>> That's a good stretch. That's a good stretch there. Well, absolutely congratulations on
Ruff. It is really, really taken off. And I know the guy right below you in the squares,
Sebastian, I saw him saying nice things about it with FastAPI and so on.
>> Yeah, yeah, I know. Thanks a lot. It's just funny because I think I was saying before
I started recording, I think when I came on Talk Python last time, I think that might
have been my first time ever on a podcast. And it was to talk about Ruff. And so I was
like, oh, wow, people care about what I'm doing. That's super cool. And Pydantic and
FastAPI were some of the earliest adopters that people had heard of. So they were like
very early on in the life cycle and helped a lot with, you know, getting people to see
Ruff and sort of care about Ruff and know that smart people are using it.
>> That's awesome. Well, when you visit Talk Python or the course's website or others,
it's all Ruff-ified. I don't know what the adjective of Ruff is, but it's been Ruff-ified.
>> It's whatever you want to say.
>> It's been Ruffed up and it works great. It's really amazing.
>> That makes the code sound really bad.
>> It's true. It's like saying it's sick. That was a sick trick they did.
>> Yeah, that code is Ruff.
>> Yeah, that code is Ruff, man. All right. Will, is your code Ruff? Who are you?
>> It's got some Ruff edges, certainly.
>> Welcome.
>> Hi. I'm Will. I'm probably best known for a library called Rich. And Rich is a library
for writing formatted content in Terminal. You can write tables and progress bars and
syntax-allocated code, all sorts of things. And that became quite popular in the Python
world. I think there was a need for it. And two years ago, I founded Textualize, which
is a company which builds on Rich to produce a library called Textual, which allows you
to build user interfaces inside the terminal. And these are kind of like -- more like web
interfaces and less like cursors applications.
>> Yeah, I was just thinking almost like Flexbox. You can dock stuff to the side and that's
part of the UI. But it's pretty amazing what you've built. I think it's pushed the terminal
far beyond what many people thought the terminal was going to be doing.
>> It's been very cool. It's been a process of discovery. It's kind of strange. You've
got technology that's been around for decades. And still discovering things that it can do,
which people haven't tried before. So, yeah, it's been a lot of fun. And it's been great
to work with a small team of developers. We've got a small core here in Edinburgh, Scotland.
And we've got one developer in Portugal. So, yeah, it's been great. And I love the reception
and love what people are building with it.
>> Yeah. It's -- so many people are interested in using Rich. And there's a ton of plug-ins,
right? There's like Rich Click and there's pytest Rich and all these things. Like, well,
whatever we're doing, it should also have what you've built, you know?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I love to see that. I love to see the ecosystem building. Our adjective
is Richified.
>> Richified. Okay. That's rich? My code is rich? Okay. Richified. Got it. I love it.
We all have adjectives that we've got to put on things.
>> Yeah. I'm a big fan of your -- you and your team's work, by the way. I'm sure you're
here all the time, but you build awesome stuff. I appreciate it.
>> Yeah. Indeed. We all are. Eric, welcome. You and I are coming in somewhat local here
out of Portland. Not Istanbul.
>> I'm actually out in Bend at the moment.
>> Are you in Bend? I absolutely love Bend.
>> Yeah. So, lots of mountains and whatnot. But, yeah. So, my background in agriculture.
Folks probably know me from kind of the read the docs ecosystem. I feel like I've been
doing this for a while compared to everyone else here. The project actually started in
2010, which is kind of amazing. And then we actually built the -- started the company
around it in 2014. So, coming up next year, that'll be 10 years. And so, yeah. And we're
all bootstrapped. So, we haven't done any venture capital. It's all been kind of just
built up the open source and then kind of turned it into a company on top of that. We
kind of have a business model of doing paid for private hosting companies as well as
advertising on open source. And we spun out a kind of a separate business called
Ethical Ads that we built kind of to basically make better advertising on the
internet. Not doing any of the creepy tracking stuff.
>> Read the docs is so critical to the open source space. Not just Python, but
especially Python. And then -- yeah. I mean, so, awesome work on that. And then just
good job on the ad stuff as well. It's -- the tendency of the whole ad space is to be
super creepy. And just like how much can we resell and how much can we buy to mix
in to create these shadow profiles. And it's not a good social trend. It's not good
for people. And it's not really necessary, right? Like, if I want to -- I've
sponsored ads on Read the Docs or had run ads on Read the Docs before. We had a
Flask course. And let's just run that ad on Flask instead of like let's see if we
can track somebody through Instagram over to Facebook.
>> We call it newspaper advertising. And it's been really cool with the advances of
ML, the content targeting has gotten pretty good. So, it's definitely a lot easier
technically these days to kind of do that content matching. But yeah, I think in
terms of the kind of open source, maybe the way that I'm a little different than
other folks here is we're actually running something more akin to a service. So,
Read the Docs, all the code is open source, but a lot of the usage is open source
projects using our hosted service. We do obviously ship a lot of code. Probably our
Sphinx theme is probably the most kind of well-known actual software that people are
using. A little bit similar to the folks here, the kind of sidebar on the left. And
yeah, so I think that's kind of the background is, yeah, we have a little bit of
everything. But yeah, it's a little more akin to something like a SaaS app, I would
say. But the code is all open source. We do get contribution in that way as well.
>> Yeah, awesome. You know, it sounds a little similar to what Textualize is
working towards as well, hosting. I mean, it's more hosting people's apps than
hosting people's apps.
>> Yeah, no, I mean --
>> Not terribly different.
>> Yeah, I mean, you know, paying for services is a classic open source
monetization strategy, right? Like you have some way to kind of build the
monetization on top.
>> Yeah, it's like what you build is great, but it's kind of hard for me to run.
Could you just do that? Yeah, sure, we can do that. Sebastian, always good to see
you. Welcome back.
>> Thank you very much for having me. Hello, everyone. I'm Sebastian Ramirez, or
Tiangolo. I created this little tool for building web APIs that is called FastAPI.
And it has been growing quite a bit. People have liked it, fortunately. And,
like, yeah, that's it. I'm probably the only one that hasn't built a company
here, I guess. Okay. Maybe -- okay. There are two of us. Nice. I want to hear
that. Okay. So this year I have been able to work full time on open source
because Sequoia Capital, the VC firm, started this open source fellowship. And
I am the first fellow, so I am kind of the test trial of the program. So I get,
you know, just to work full time on open source. And that's how I've been able
to just, yeah, release a bunch of stuff in FastAPI and the ecosystem, like the
other libraries. FastAPI, SQL model, and a couple of other things. But, yeah,
that's pretty much it.
>> Yeah, awesome. Well, FastAPI is definitely the poster child for modern
Python on the web. And Samuel's work, obviously, is central to that as well,
right, with Pydantic being such a core element there. So very awesome.
>> Yeah, and, like, I mean, FastAPI is built on top of, like, great open source
tools and their needs. So Pydantic does all the data validation, and on the
other side, Starlette does all the web parts. So, yeah, it's like -- and, like,
it's a very close -- how do you call it? Like, close friendship between all the
projects. Pydantic, Starlet, UbiCorn, FastAPI. Like, you know, like, we
actually know -- by this point, we actually know each other in person. Like,
the current maintainer of Starlette and UbiCorn works for the Pydantic company.
And he's, like, the top FastAPI expert right now. And, like, you know, like,
it's very nice, because it helps the dynamism of, like, the speed of building
stuff is great.
>> Yeah, I imagine a lot of people don't realize the interconnections between
these different projects that are at play here. Yeah.
>> Yeah, it's definitely super fun.
>> Absolutely.
>> And then it's worth saying we in Pydantic use FastAPI as well as
contributing to the libraries that build it. We also use FastAPI for the
services that we're building. So we're, like, consumers both directly and
indirectly of the things that we maintain in open source.
>> Awesome.
>> So, yeah, and chat quite often to Sebastian, so it's awesome.
>> It's turtles all the way down, basically.
>> Exactly.
>> Gina, also awesome to have you back.
>> Yeah, very happy to be back. That's really, really great to be here now, I
think, for the second time. So -- and the third if we call Python Bytes. So,
yeah, my name is Gina Häuske, and I'm probably -- yeah, I don't know if I'm
that well-known throughout the Python community, but I'm quite well-known in
the 3D printing community for having created OctoPrint, which is the snappy
web interface for your 3D printer, and the server part of that is all written
in Python. And I started a project back in 2012 when I got my first 3D printer
as a regular pet project on the side after hours, vacation, blah, blah, blah.
In 2014, I got hired by a 3D printing company to work on it full-time, and in
2016, that company ran out of money, and I suddenly found myself with a full
fledged, full-grown open source project and no funding whatsoever. So I tried
this whole crowdfunding stuff with Patreon, and that is pretty much how I've
been working ever since. So I'm self-employed under German law. I'm a
freelancer, and yeah, all my income comes from people who just sent me money
for working on OctoPrint.
>> Did you say since 2016?
>> Since 2016, yeah.
>> Wow, okay, cool.
>> So full-time since 2014, and self-employed and crowdfunded since 2016.
So it's been a while.
>> That's awesome. I also went full-time on all my stuff here in 2016, although
it's basically not open source. It talks a whole lot about open source stuff.
>> Totally.
>> Awesome. It's been a while. Congratulations.
>> Thank you. I'm still surprised it works, to be honest. I'm waiting every
day that it stops working, and yeah, actually, this year, it came a bit close,
and then I put out a blog post basically along the lines of, you know, the
income is going this, but the usage numbers are going that, so something is
amiss here, and we need to talk. And then the community rallied, and stuff
fixed itself again, so that's pretty amazing.
>> That's really awesome. Congratulations. It's easy for people to just go, oh,
it's free, and there's some people supporting it, and just kind of assume that
things are taken care of.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Really good. Really good. Yeah, you have a ton of supporters on
GitHub sponsors as well, right?
>> Yeah. Actually, I've diversified over the years, and in the beginning, it was
just Patreon and PayPal, and then I started adding new payment platforms and
options, because people prefer to be able to use the stuff that they know, and
some people don't like Patreon, some people don't like and don't know GitHub
sponsors and stuff, and so you just give them the options to choose whatever they
feel comfortable with, and this increases the likelihood that they actually will
go through with throwing something in your head, so to speak.
>> Yeah. Yeah, absolutely.
>> At least that's my feeling. I don't know.
>> I think that GitHub sponsors has been really positive for open source.
>> Absolutely.
>> I think it's made it pretty easy to just check a box. They already have your
credit card, potentially, and you just want to give a little support instead of,
you know, one-time PayPal donation here that you forget about after once and all
that.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Before we move on here, there's a funny comment, nice comment out.
Kanishka says, "This group, look at all of you. You guys are the Avengers of
Python open source," right, which is kind of like the superheroes. I love it.
It's somewhat actually true, it seems. Okay. So the next thing I want to ask is a
little bit of an origin story. Just, you know, what projects did you try and that
didn't really get traction, and then, you know, how do you think that your project
got traction here? And I know, Samuel, you might vanish any minute, so you're
next. You're up first on this one.
>> That's a really interesting. I've built a number of things in open source. I
started something last week. Open source on Friday, but has gotten more stars over
the last three days or, I guess, week now. The first project I started, ARQ, has
over, I think, coming up on six years. So I mean, that's front end, and front end
gets a lot more traction than, like, queuing in RPC does. But, yeah, I don't know
how, like, obviously there were some things I played with back then that never
took off, but, yeah, it was this, like, I think I was in the right time, right
place with PyPens. They'd obviously been around in Python for a long time, but back
in 2017 when I started in PyLantic, their usage was growing really fast, and I think
there were lots of people like me who found it kind of frustrating that they were
there and didn't do anything. So, yeah, I think being in the right time, right place
was super valuable for me. And obviously, like, great projects like FastAPI,
adopting PyLantic, it made a big difference, but I don't know. What's weird, if
you look at the download chart, it's like, it was this inflection point at the
beginning of 2021, so then we had, like, 5 million downloads a month, and since
then it's been kind of almost exactly linear growth to now 125 million downloads
a month. So something weird happened in 2021, long after the project was started,
I don't know. But, yeah, I think it was right place, right time, and, yeah, and
thus frustration was the starting point. On that note, I'm going to have to rush
guys a bit. It was great to see everyone, and I'm sure I'll meet you all at a
conference soon. Bye-bye.
- Yeah, thanks for dropping in.
- Good to see you.
- Bye-bye.
- All right. Charlie, keep going around the circle here.
- Yeah, yeah, of course. Yeah, you know, it's interesting because I, like, this
is, Ruff is really my first time being a maintainer and, like, publishing open,
like, I've been a consumer of open source, right, for my whole career, but I was
never really, I guess, like, a creator or a publisher or a maintainer of open
source. And it's, you know, around the time that I started working on Ruff, I was
working on, like, a couple different projects, and they all, I was kind of
trying to figure out what I wanted to do next. I'd left my job recently, and RUF
was kind of motivated by a lot of the experiences I had at my job where I was,
like, maintaining a large Python code base.
- Did you leave your job with the intent of going to work on Ruff, or were you just
like, I'm going to leave, and then I'm going to figure something out?
- It's funny. I left my job with the intent of starting a company, but I did not
think it would be Ruff, and Ruff was, like, this distracting side project that I was
working on while I was, like, I was working with a friend, and we were, like,
trying to figure out, like, the Venn diagram of interests, of, like, what are we
willing to work on full-time together, what makes sense given, like, our interests,
and then in all my free time, I was, like, I just want to work on developer tools,
and, like, I worked on, I built Ruff, or I started building Ruff. I worked on, like,
yeah, I worked on a lot of different, not a lot, but, like, I was working on a
couple different projects. I did, like, a sort of CI/CD thing where you, like,
write Docker files and, like, CI files in TypeScript, and they, like, trans-file
down, and I was, like, I think that has a lot of cool ideas. I worked on, like,
it was pretty early in a lot of the LLM stuff. I worked on, like, a code-based
wide refactoring tool where you, like, give it examples of, like, before and
after, and then it tries to find examples. It was, like, a co-pilot for your entire
code base. It didn't work that well, like, at scale, but it was, like, a cool idea.
So I was, like, working on the stuff that was all open source.
- Maybe it could have been a timing thing. Like, maybe today that would be all the...
- Yeah, I mean, it's also, like, you know, it's also an effort thing, I guess.
Like, I put a lot more into Ruff, and it was interesting because I kept viewing
RUF as, like, you know, it was probably open source at that point, but I don't
think I had, like, launched it. And I kept viewing it as, like, like I said,
like a little bit of a distraction, and my friend was, like, you know, I think
you should really, like, push to, like, release this because, like, if you think
it's, like, interesting, then, like, other people will probably think it's
interesting. And he was the person that really, like, motivated me to actually,
like, see it through to doing the release. And then I did the release, and, like, a
lot of people were actually interested in it, so that kind of gave me, like, the
energy to, like, really start working on it full-time and just kind of see where it
went. And it was really, like, projects like Pydantic and, like, Sebastian started,
like, commenting on issues and stuff, and I was, like, wow, like, real serious
projects are looking at this, like, crazy tool. And let me just see. I'm just going
to do whatever it takes to make it, like, a feasible choice for them and just
started, like, you know, cranking through, like, all the issues and all the things
that we were missing. So it escalated pretty quickly, I think.
- Yeah. Did it surprise you?
- Oh, yes. Yes. Absolutely. I mean, like, well, I was convinced that, like, I was
convinced that I had faced, like, this problem around tooling as, like, our
codebase got large in my last company and that there was an opportunity to, like,
build, like, better, more performant tooling. I wasn't sure how much -- I
genuinely wasn't sure, like, how widely that message would resonate with people.
And so, I don't know. It's, like, a little bit of luck, right? Like, sometimes you
work on great projects and then, like, they go nowhere and, like, just no one
happens to see it. And then sometimes you work on a good thing and, like, it does
go somewhere. And so there are certain things that are within your control,
certain things that aren't. I feel like we did -- I did a good job of, like,
communicating the project and, like, why it was interesting and why it was
exciting. But I also feel like I got a little bit lucky that it just, like,
gravitated towards the right people and got attention in the right ways.
- Sure. Also, maybe that Black had existed, which is a little ironic because
Black kind of solves a real similar problem. But, like, people were, okay, we
embrace the idea of the thing that Rough does really well. You know, you're
convinced them to use Rough in that sense.
- Yeah. I mean, we have a little bit -- I mean, it gets back to this. Like, we
have a little bit of, like, a second-mover advantage, right? Where, like,
there's a lot of existing tools that people use already and, like, a lot of
those practices, like, the idea of using a format or the idea of running code
mods, like, the idea of using a linter and, like, the knowledge of, like, what
kinds of rules are valuable and, like, what kinds of analysis we can do. Like,
all that stuff existed. And that was part of the story, really, was I was, like,
these tools are great and I get a lot of value out of them, but I want them to be,
like, easier and faster. And so, yeah, there's definitely a strong timing thing.
I think, like, I think Rust, too, this is maybe, like, a little bit more
specific to what we're doing, but, like, you know, I think, like, the
intersection between Python and Rust has gotten -- or the -- I guess the
interoperability between them and sort of the ecosystem around it has just grown a
lot. I mean, still, I would say, like, pretty early, but it's, like, matured and
grown a lot over the past few years. And so, even just the fact that, like, at my
last company, we started to introduce Rust and we started to, like, move some of our
core systems into Rust and expose them over Py03. Like, the fact that that existed
and the fact that I was, like, exposed to that, like, that's all just, like, pure
chance. Otherwise, I never would have thought to do this.
>> Yeah. Very cool. Well, congrats. Well-deserved.
>> Thanks.
>> All using Ruff, as we said. It was excellent. Will, Rich is awesome. Why do
you think it took off? Did you try stuff before?
>> Yeah. I tried a lot of stuff before. Before GitHub, you know, coding has always
been my hobby. You know, I do it for work. I come home and work on a hobby project.
And it just seemed natural to want to share it. Pre-GitHub, I would just put stuff
on my blog and get some feedback from it there. I quite enjoyed that. And, yeah, I
did a number of open source projects pre-Rich. I had a BB code parsing library. I
had a chess library. I had a web toolkit. So, yeah, when Rich came along, it was
another hobby project. Something to keep me entertained.
>> Why is this terminal so boring? Come on. See what we can do.
>> Yeah. I'd always used the terminal. And I always struggled when you've got a
bunch of white text on black background and you're trying to pick out an IP
address from somewhere. And, you know, I'd always wished, oh, I wish it would just
format it and colorize it for me. I know this is possible, but it doesn't happen.
So, then, yeah, I just started it. And it came together quite well. When I released
it, it was like, boom. The stars just started accumulating. I got lots of
feedback. It was very exciting. And I kept building on it. It was kind of like
issue driven development. So, people would just ask for something. Oh, that's a good
idea. And go ahead and add that and implement it. And it grew from there. And it
became really large. I did actually prior to Rich, I had a library called Py File
System. And this is kind of like a wrapper to file systems. So, you can have the
same interface for your FTP server as a hard drive or a zip file, S3 bucket. And
that got some use in the community. It wasn't enormous. But that taught me a lot
about building open source. You know, managing feedback and issues, et cetera.
So, that was a great experience when I started working on Rich. And I was very
surprised actually how successful it became. The first time I realized that this
was bigger than just a hobby project is when someone told me off for violating
SemVer, I released a clear breaking change because I thought, nobody's using that
yet. So, the next day I got told off quite appropriately. And then I thought, okay,
I'll have to take this more seriously. If people are using this in their day job,
they can't just have someone who's just like throwing new bits of code and
changing functionality. They had to treat it like it was an actual my day job.
>> Yeah. Well, everyone on the call here probably has a little bit of nervousness
about like, if I break this, there are a lot of people that depend on this thing.
>> Yeah. And it's so different. Like, it just changes so much. Like, when you
were talking about the issue driven development thing, too, I was like, I just
remember that phase of like, rough, where it was like, anyone who cared at all
about the project, all I wanted to do was make them happy. Oh, wow, that seems
like a cool idea. Let's definitely do it. It was the point in time where I could
fix the bug, cut a release the same day, and then their thing is fixed. And then
it's like, okay, great, now we have a relationship. Thanks for using my thing,
blah, blah, blah. But that's changed so much. Because then I went through the
same experiences of like, I ship a release with a break and change that I didn't
really document, a lot of people get upset, and then you realize, okay, I actually
have some more responsibility now.
>> Yeah, these days, it's more like trying to find the balance between saying no to
stuff that you then have to end up maintaining and not like, disappointing
people too much because you say no or things like that. And then trying to keep
this whole interaction with people nice, even though you don't want to do stuff
they want you to do.
>> Yeah, I have this analogy.
>> Because you know it's better for the project.
>> Yeah, PRs are like cake or puppies. If it's a simple bug fix, that's like cake.
You're like, thank you, I enjoyed that cake, then move on. But some PRs are like
a puppy. It's like, perfect, you like puppies, but you've got to feed them and
clean up after them.
>> Why am I staying in the rain with this puppy on a Friday night? How do I get
here?
>> Yeah, so sometimes you have to say --
>> Collecting the puppy's poop.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Sometimes you say, thank you, but I just can't look after another puppy right
now. And that's a difficult thing to come to terms with when the project gets a
bit more mature. Because previously you're accepting all the puppies, but then you
have to start saying no to puppies. And Rich definitely got there.
>> Will, do you hate puppies? Come on, that's a pretty hard stance.
>> I'm kind of a cat person, to be honest with you. But yeah, I mean, you have to
say no eventually.
>> I think this is where plug-ins always kind of like take the center stage, right?
You're like, oh, that sounds like a great idea for you to maintain external to my
library.
>> That was exactly my approach to the whole situation, yeah.
>> Yeah, sounds like it.
>> Have fun.
>> But also the probability of some little change breaking someone's code and being
considered a breaking change grows as the project grows in usage. And at some point
it's like almost any change will end up breaking someone in very unexpected ways.
Because they are doing something really, really weird, but you know, like someone
is doing it. So it becomes more and more difficult to know, like, is this a breaking
change or not? Like, no, I should be using this variable here or this parameter, but
like, you know, there's someone out there doing that. So I don't know. I feel
defining what is actually a breaking change and what is a strict semver gets more
difficult as things grow. Yeah, I don't know.
>> One of the things I like that the Django project did was basically only things
that are documented are supported, basically. That was kind of the line they drew, and
I thought that was a pretty good way to draw it. But yeah, you're always -- that
never actually works. That doesn't make people happy. It just gives you plausible
deniability.
>> Don't yell at me. It's not my fault.
>> Yeah, I think adding a formal versioning policy is one of the best things that we
did. Because for a long time, Ruff was just -- we only used patch releases. So we
got to like 0.0, like 285 or something. And we had basically no guarantees about
what would or wouldn't change, like, across releases. And as the project got more
and more popular, like, that started to cause more and more problems. And so Zaney,
someone on our team, when they joined, one of the first few things they did was
add a formal versioning policy, and we added preview behavior. So you can opt --
similar to what Block has, you can opt in to breaking or more experimental changes.
And so now we have clear expectations around what it means to bump a minor release,
et cetera, et cetera. And that has made our lives a lot easier, actually having
clear expectations around that that are communicated and respected. It's the kind
of thing that you just don't think about at all, at least I didn't, until Ratchet
got bigger.
>> Yeah. Some people's code runs things like FastAPI or Octoprint or whatever.
Your stuff rewrites people's code.
>> Yeah. But it's run at run time. I don't know. I actually think it's easier.
>> Yeah.
>> I do say -- I mean, it's like -- it's funny you talk about the plugins thing,
because, like, I've actually very intentionally taken the opposite approach,
which is we have, like, almost no public API. Because, like, the only public API
is the CLI. And, like, we don't expose our API in any other way. And that's
because, like, we know we're going to change, like, everything internally, like,
pretty dramatically. And so we wanted to have, like, full control over that
without having to worry about breaking people's stuff yet. But it's, like -- it's
starting to become more of a problem, because more and more people want to use
it as a library in, like, different ways. But it's -- I don't know. It's, like --
it's sort of a counterintuitive way to, like, make our lives easier as
maintainers, was, like, not expose any public API, apart from the CLI.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Very interesting.
>> There's a funny sort of anecdote. I'm rewriting a lot of the documentation
for SQL model, because I want to have examples -- right now I have examples
that are compatible with Python 3.7 and above. But I want to have also the
syntax for 3.9 and 3.10. In 3.10, you can have, like, the unions using the
vertical bar and these things. And I want to have examples for each one of
those. So the approach I did was to write a script that will automatically
update each one of the files by calling rough as a soup process. So that's the
API. And then, like, you know, like --
>> Yeah.
>> Like, doing all that stuff. But, like, yeah. Like, another -- another
example.
>> Yeah. Great.
>> That's great.
>> Using as an API before it's --
>> I've heard this before as --
>> API, right.
>> Yeah.
>> It would be created.
>> Exactly. I've heard this before as, like, Hiram's law, which is, like,
with a sufficiently large number of users, like, any implementation detail
becomes -- someone will eventually rely on an implementation detail. Like,
any arbitrary implementation, someone is probably relying on that behavior,
which is basically the behavior of the program is the API in the end.
>> Unfortunately.
>> Yeah. They'll find the underscore functions. You've tried to dissuade them
from using it and all the things. Yeah. Eric, what's the origin story for
Read the Docs, and what did you try, and how do you think it caught on?
>> Yeah. So, I mean, this was kind of way back in the day. But, yeah, I kind
of got started writing Django plugins, you know, apropos to the conversation.
You know, I was working at the Lawrence Journal World, where Django came
from, and it was kind of early in my career, and I was just kind of getting
excited about open source and blogging, and just basically built a few of
these kind of testing-related open source projects. And then that was kind
of where I got started with open source. And then basically it was the
classic scratch-o-niche thing, right? Like, it's like, I have a bunch of
open source projects I want to write documentation. How do I solve that
problem? And back in the day, that was a much harder problem to solve,
right? It was basically just, like, build a zip file and upload it to
packages.python.org, if folks remember that one. Or was it packages or
whatever the docs -- there was a docs hosting on PyPI, basically. And,
yeah, basically just wanted to kind of build a better version of that
that integrated with GitHub. I feel like webhooks were, like, the cool new
thing back in 2010, you know? And so that was really kind of the insight,
right? It's like, let's build this kind of, like, CI/CD workflow on top of
webhooks. And I actually did build kind of a version of that the previous
year around kind of, like, code quality stuff. So it actually ran kind of
like a linter and built a website on commit and had a similar kind of
workflow, right? Where it gave you a grade and did all this kind of stuff,
which is, like, 2009. And, yeah, that didn't really catch on at all. But
then I think read the docs, just rebuilt it. And then I was using it for my
own projects. And I actually had the need to kind of maintain it and keep
it updated. And then I think people just kind of grew naturally. You know,
gave some conference talks, that kind of stuff. But I think it just solved
a problem that people had. And that's always going to be the best way to
grow a thing. So.
- Yeah, absolutely. Awesome. What's read the docs written in? Is it Django?
- Yep. Yeah, it's all Django and Python.
- Right on. Funny coincidence. I went to college in Lawrence at the
University of Kansas.
- Oh, nice.
- I was right there, right at the heart of Django. But I moved off to grad
school, like, a couple years before all that happened. So I missed the
excitement.
- It's funny, everybody, I grew up in Virginia, and everyone was like,
"You're going to Kansas? You graduated school? How are you going there?
Like, what?" Everybody thought it was the weirdest decision. But yeah,
I really do think, you know, ending up in that Python and Django ecosystem
has been pretty transformative to my life.
- Yeah.
- So, you know, worked out.
- Lawrence is a pretty cool little town, actually. Of all the places.
- Yeah.
- Sebastian, how'd you come about this crazy idea to put types into our
web apps? You know Python, that's dynamic. It doesn't have types. What
are you doing?
- Yeah. I don't know. It's so crazy. It's so fun to see. It said Michael
Larson in the chat, like, "They maintain our URL need three, and the Python
security developer in Resilience," just like, chatting along with us. Like,
he probably has had to use so much stuff as us.
- Yeah, I'm sure. I'm sure.
- So, like, some of the first things that I did in open source were actually
Docker images for deploying Flask, because I was working with Flask. And
deploying Flask was difficult, and I needed to be able to combine Nginx with
UWSGI and, like, a bunch of things. And, like, they all had their own custom
configuration files, and it was, you know, like, so difficult. I didn't like
doing that, and then I just had to study how to do that stuff. And then after
going through all that, I wanted to save everyone else's time doing that.
- Yeah.
- So, I was like, "Let's just put a Docker image with this, and a lot of
documentation of how this Docker image works, and how you can use it with some
sensible defaults." So, you know, it was just like a weird contraption. That was
it. But it actually grew, and, like, got, like, a few stars, like, a bunch of
stars. For me, it was a lot, like, you know, like, a hundred stars. Oh, my gosh,
I'm an open source developer. And then, like, at some point, it had, like, a
thousand stars or something like that. I was so happy about that. And at some
point, it was kind of the de facto standard for doing Flask in Docker. That was
then the first thing that I did. I ended up with FastAPI. I was avoiding building
FastAPI for a long while, and I was trying all the other frameworks and all the
other tools. I was convinced that there was something that would do the things
that I wanted. I just had to find it. And as I was trying different frameworks,
also in different languages, I was extending the list of things that I wanted
to have, and also a list of things that I wanted not to have. For example, I
didn't want --
>> That takes you farther and farther away from any frameworks.
>> Exactly. Having one that would tick all the boxes. So it was like, ah. But
then I realized, like, I really like this thing of having types, as in TypeScript,
because you get out the completion and inline errors. And this is so cool. It's
so cool to be able to have this. I want to have this in Python. And in Python,
other type annotations. And it's like, this is great. How do I use them? There's
no way to use them with the current frameworks. So at some point I actually
found the right framework. It was called API star, by the same author of Django
Rust framework. And it was just missing some authentication stuff. I said,
okay, I'm going to contribute to the stuff. When I was about to jump into the
code, he said, I have to deprecate this. I will go focus full on Starlet. And
then he went to build Starlet. This is Tom Christie, which is super prolific
and an amazing open source person in general. And then at that point is when I
said, like, ah, I just have to try it. Let's just do it. So I'm just going to
try to build something that will be kind of a spiritual successor to API star,
built on top of Starlet. So I was, you know, like, I was actually inheriting
all the learnings from Flask, Django, Django Rust framework, and all the
ecosystem, and just, like, bringing all those ideas together. At least that was
my intention. And then I wanted to have a bit of better type annotations. So I
saw that Pydantic was using standard type annotations. So people wouldn't have to
learn this, like, you know, from FastAPI import special string or something like
that. Just instead of that, just pure string. So I wanted to have something
based on standards, like open API, JSON schema, and all the stuff. And based on
standard Python and to have, like, the simplest syntax possible and to, you
know, like, give the best developer experience possible, while, you know,
like, not adding, like, any additional steps for developers to build something
that by default will have all the best practices built in. That was the
intention. And I was just, like, trying to solve it for the things that I was
working on. I was supposed to be doing AI and machine learning and stuff, but,
like, I had to stop for a bit to solve APIs, and I got stuck in APIs. And that's
how I ended up with FastAPI. >> I think you made a pretty decent choice. It
seems like FastAPI is doing all right. >> Yeah. >> I just saw you -- >> Much
better than what I ever had expected. >> Yeah, I know. Congratulations. Well,
it's also deserved. But I also just saw an X, I don't know, a post on X Twitter,
whatever you -- however you address these things, where you said -- you showed a
graph where the number of GitHub stars for FastAPI just passed Flask. And, you
know, I have a lot of respect for Flask and the Paladins team and David Lord and
all those folks. But, you know, awesome. Awesome that your stuff has taken off so
much. That's really cool. >> Yeah, it's super cool. It's amazing. And, you
know, like, Flask was one of the big inspirations for FastAPI, and I've been
able to be at this point. It's crazy. Like, yeah. I still can't, you know, get
over it. Yeah, super cool. Super cool to be able to build all this and to keep
building more stuff. So, yeah, super nice. >> Yeah. One final comment before we
move on to OctoPrint. But one of the things I kind of see you doing in the world
is you're like the combiner. You're like, oh, we've got this cool stuff with
Pydantic and Starlet. Now, can we combine it in this way to make this, you know,
and Swagger? And similarly with SQL model, you're like, well, Pydantic is
cool, but SQLAlchemy is kind of cool, but it could be more better. It could be
better, right? So, anyway, good job. >> Yeah, and also like Typer. That is the
way for building command line applications. You just click with the type
annotations, the same ideas from Pydantic, and now with integrated building
support for Reach. So, like also picking Will's work, trying just to put a bunch
of things together. I'm just, you know, like I'm just making cocktails
everywhere. >> Yes, exactly. >> It's more than that, but there is a lot of
value in combining things in a smart way, an accessible way. >> Yeah. Yeah,
awesome. All right. Gina, you told us a little bit about the origin story, but
like what did you try before? And then I have a follow-up question I think is
unique to your project. >> I wouldn't necessarily say that I tried anything
before because the whole thing was completely unintentional. I mean, I
basically bought myself a 3D printer in late 2012. I wanted to be able to put it
in my spare bathroom and monitor it from afar because back then this thing was
tying up my PC. You had to constantly keep it connected so it could operate and
that for hours and hours, and it made noises and it produced fumes, and I just
wanted it out of my office. And to be able to play games on my PC again instead
of having it, yeah, basically communicate constantly with a 3D printer. And so I
bought myself a Raspberry Pi and I was looking online for something to be able
to just put on this Pi and attach to the printer and throw a Wi-Fi dongle in
because back then the Pi didn't have Wi-Fi built in, and throw that in the
spare bathroom, but there wasn't anything. So over the course of my Christmas
break in 2012, I sat down and changed that. And this is basically the origin
story of Octoprint. I just wanted to scratch my own itch. I wanted to put my
printer in my spare bathroom. This is all. And apparently a lot of people had the
same problem because I just, you know, like how we like to do these things. We
build something that we think might be interesting. We throw it up on GitHub and
go just like here, go nuts, enjoy, have fun with that. And I suddenly started
getting emails from all around the world like, "Hey, I have this and this
printer. Can you also make it work with that?" And so this escalated and I went
like, "Oh, someone is using it. Of course I'm going to add this support. And of
course I'm going to add this feature." And it just grew and grew and grew and
grew. And apparently I just hit a nerve. So this was utterly unplanned. This was
never my intention at all. And I just wanted to solve my own problem and have
continued to solve my own problems and the problems of other people ever since.
Before Octoprint, I actually was also quite active in a little project called
DokuWiki where I was developing some plugins for that. And I even did open
source before I knew what open source was with some PHP scripts when I was 18 or
so that I threw up on my website. But yeah, Octoprint was like, it took over my
life. It just was an accident, a happy little accident maybe.
How did you decide, "Okay, this is a job for me rather than just a thing you
worked on?"
Yeah, so the thing is, by mid-2013, I went to 80% on my regular day job. I used
to be a software architect/consultant with big corporation, Java World, all that
enterprise stuff. And to be able to dedicate one day per week fully to
Octoprint, plus of course the weekends and the after hours and the vacations and
all of that. And that still didn't suffice anymore by 2014. And I noticed that it
was impacting my health, it was impacting my relationships. And that was actually
quite perfect timing really when this company that hired me initially approached
me and said, "Hey, do you want to maybe fly out to us and we'll chat? And if you
like all of that, what we have to propose, then we can just do that." And this is
how it then continued to go from 2014 until 2016. And yeah, it was never my
intention to become self-employed. I'm a quite risk-averse person actually. So
when this point came where I was like, "Okay, either I find a way to keep funding
this or I have to really drop it," because it was way too big by then to be kept as
a pet project without being utterly, utterly unhealthy. Yeah, I decided to jump
into the cold water and have been trying to keep up at the surface ever since
basically. So yeah, all of that really completely unplanned.
- Yeah, cool. What an adventure, huh?
- Indeed, yeah. And the good thing is even if people don't understand what open
sources or what code is, I always have quite a topic at parties. So that is fun
because, yeah, people give you money for something they can get for free? What?
- Exactly. Yeah, if you're not familiar with open source, then it definitely is a
weird thing to say.
- Absolutely. It was tricky to find a text consultant who understands the concept.
- Yeah, I can imagine.
- Yeah, that's interesting.
- I'm sure. All right.
- I was reading recently, I was like, "What do you do? What is your day job?"
And they're like, "Oh, I'm a software developer." So you work for a company.
- I mean, you're free.
- I build software that is free for others to use. And who's paying you? A company
that pays money to companies to build companies. So you're building a company.
No, it's like, you know, like it was a long conversation. They got bored and left.
That was it.
- This doesn't make any sense, yeah.
- I've just taken to say I'm a software developer and I work with 3D printers.
And then people usually stop asking questions because 3D printers are this
mysterious thing that no one understands. Anyhow, usually at least. And then, yeah.
Unless they say, "Oh, 3D printers." And then I say, "Yeah, do you know 3D printers?"
And they go, "Yeah, yeah, I have one." And then I can say, "Oh, do you know OctoPrint?"
"Yes." "Oh, yeah, I made that." And then, "Oh."
- Yeah.
- Yeah, it's tricky to explain to people. I'm sometimes not even sure my parents
understand what I do.
- I'm sure that my parents don't understand what I do. But that's okay. I'm sure they're
still proud of you anyway. It's fine.
- Yeah, my parents are probably proud of me.
- I would like to just maybe…we're getting a little short on time here.
Coming up to the end of our Avengers meeting. Let's close it out with this.
Go around one more time. Let you all, or maybe just as a group, kind of chime in
on this. Speaking to the people out there listening who want to start an open source
project or want to contribute to open source or somehow kind of get involved in
similar ways, what would you do different if you started now? Many of you have been
working on this for a long time. You've had a lot of experience. If somebody said,
"Well, the world is…somehow the memory has been erased from the fact that Ruff or
Rich or OctoPrint or whatever existed to start over," what would you do different or
the same?
- I would use FastAPI.
- Yay!
- Yeah, good use of a time machine there. I've had multiple conversations over the
years where people are like, "Why don't you use this library?" And I'm like, "Oh, it
didn't exist."
- Exactly. Yeah, that's the problem.
- Exactly.
- Yeah, and when you actually have a plug-in system, then swapping out stuff like
that can become very tricky.
- Absolutely.
- I don't know. When I get asked how to, what to work on, what to study, what to
focus, how to get into open source or like almost any of those questions, I always say
that the main advice I give is just to focus on a problem that is important to you more
than, you know, like innovation, market disruption or whatever. Just like focus on a
problem that is actually important to you, hopefully that is important to others as
well. And if it's not a problem that affects you directly, hopefully it affects
someone that is very close to you so you can get like a very tight feedback loop of
what you are building. And then try to solve it. And then use that as the guide of what
to do, what to learn, what to focus on, what to do. In many cases it's just learning a
framework that is already there. You know, like why would I go and build a system to
control 3D printers instead of just like learning how to use Afterprint. In many
cases solving the problem is just like using the tool that is already there. But then in
some cases you end up figuring out that there's no tool and you just have to build it.
There's actually no link there on Formatter that can be super fast so you can run it
every time you just hit save. So then you just have to build it in Rust and create
Rust. Or like, you know, like there's always like this thing that you are trying to
solve that is just not solved there yet. And that is what gives you the best value and
the best outcome. In many cases it can be just like, you know, contributing to
another open source project or building something new. But the thing is like for me
it's just like focusing on a problem that is important. That is what has worked for
me at least.
Yeah, good advice.
I would add to that that you really shouldn't try to, I mean you need to be really
passionate about the thing as well, right? It needs to be something that is really
something you're into, something that you will want to spend a lot of time on that is
actually not your working hours and such because otherwise the whole joke until this
becomes anything viable, anything big enough to support you in any kind of way, even
if it's just being able to, I don't know, drink an additional coffee per week or
something, that will be a quite long slog and a lot of work and a lot of blood and
sweat and tears. And so you really need to be into this so that you want to do that.
If you are just in that for the end goal of, I don't know, becoming rich through
open source, which by the way will probably not work.
Only when.
I got rich.
Okay, that was unintentional. Then this will not work out. You need to focus on the
path to the goal and not the goal. A lot of people try to reach for the end goal
before they actually are willing to actually walk the path. I also get this along.
I happen to be in the GitHub star program and I've had a lot of people ask me, how
do you become a GitHub star? And that is just the wrong question to ask. That's
just the same as it is. How do you become an open source maintainer of a popular
project? Like you just have to do whatever you are interested in. You have to do
work and you have to be passionate about your work. And then maybe if you hit the
right nerve, then that will happen and maybe it won't.
Yeah. I think it's very interesting that none of us had a career path to where we
are now. We didn't set out to be where we are now. It just feels like we kind of
followed our own intuition and it worked out. Which means it's very difficult when
someone asks me, well, how do you become an open source developer? How do you
start a company? I'm not quite sure. I can tell you my path to there. But it's
very hard for me to articulate to someone else.
I think there's a lot of luck involved as well. You have to do all this stuff and
then roll the dice. If it gets a six, then you can be successful.
Yeah. There's an element of luck, but it's kind of like a luck you make for
yourself. And it might take you to somewhere else or it might not. But as long
as you're passionate about it and you enjoy it, then great things will happen.
Also, Will and Charlie, you both took some specific time on your own money to
really level up what you're working on, which is pretty brave. Not a lot of
people would say, I'm just going to spend my savings to work on this project and
see if I can make it go. You've earned some of that through taking that chance
and putting in that time and effort, I think.
For me, that didn't last very long. Because for three months, I was living on
sponsorship. And then GCs came along and then there was like cash.
Then your world changed and you had to learn a whole new set of skills, I'm
sure.
Yeah. And then I had a job and responsibilities.
I do feel really lucky that, like I said, this is my first time being a
maintainer. And it was very clear to me quickly that for Ruff to have the pace
of development and the scope that it has, it had to be a full-time thing. That
was pretty obvious to me quickly. And I have a lot of respect for people who
have been maintainers for longer periods of time and in a way where it's not
their full-time job or they have to do it on the side. I think I haven't really
been in that position. But it's already clear to me that that takes a lot of
dedication and commitment. So I feel very lucky that I get to work on open
source full-time. I know it's not all entirely luck, right? Like you were
saying. You increase your luck surface area and then opportunities come your
way. But I do think it's just a very fortunate position that these kinds of
opportunities do exist. Because maintaining popular stuff is a lot. It's a
lot. I mean, there are privileges that come with it, 100%. But I mean, yeah,
it's a ton. It's a lot of work and a lot of stress and a lot of responsibility.
Well, and you don't necessarily have to start your own right away.
I didn't have gray hair before this talk.
You don't necessarily have to start your own either. You could contribute to a
really popular one and kind of get into the scene. And, you know, like, Eric,
that sounds a little bit like your story. Like you were in the Django scene and
then spun off from that what you guys are doing, right?
Yeah, yeah, definitely. And, you know, part of an open source community and
definitely kind of going to PyCon and just kind of being surrounded by those
people. Because that was always the -- it's very lonely work just to have an
inbox of GitHub issues and then no inbox thank yous. You know? And like going to
conferences and that kind of stuff was really where you feel the appreciation
and you really kind of actually feel the value that you're providing as well as
just the stress of the things you're breaking.
Totally agree with that.
Absolutely. The conferences are great to really feel the appreciation rather
than just the --
Yeah, they'll say thank you and then they'll give you a bug report. But at
least the thank you.
While I'm talking to you, there was this -- could I just show you this one
thing we're doing this hour?
I do think an interesting observation for me has been that like a year ago I
didn't really know anyone in Python open source. Like at all. And like I was a
user of Python in my day job every day but I was not interacting with Python.
And in a year, yeah, now like Sebastian we've interacted a bunch. There's just
a lot of people that I've come to know and think of as like friends. So I think
they're really -- especially if you're interested in getting involved and
putting in work, I really don't think there are significant barriers. And like
you get out of it what you put in. So I think I've been very impressed with just
how welcoming and friendly the community has been, especially other maintainers.
Yeah, absolutely. Talk to a lot of people who show up at PyCon and they're
like I was really nervous to come here or I feel like I didn't fit in and they
just had such a great experience. And I said, well, did you feel --
That was me. That was my first PyCon this year. I'd never been to a Python
conference.
That was such an amazing party.
That's true. I loved the Benihana.
That was interesting. All right, guys. Well, I think we are pretty much out of
time. Anyone want to have some final thoughts for listeners before we wrap it
up?
Go on, build some cool stuff.
Who's brave enough?
How can maintain it today, I think.
Give cake, not puppies. Let's leave it with that. Give cake, not puppies.
And be really careful before you start a popular source project. It might take
over your life. If you want this, great. But if not, then --
Yeah, careful what you wish for. You might get it.
Gina, Sebastian, Eric, Will, Charlie, thank you all for being on the show.
This has been a ton of fun.
Thank you very much for having us. It's been an honor to be with these amazing
people. Thank you.
I agree.
Honestly, I had a blast hearing everyone's stories because I hadn't heard any of
this before. Thanks to everyone else and thanks, Michael.
Yeah, you bet. Bye, all.